---
layout: post
title: Size Test
author: Joe Jones
---

Does the size of the blog matter.

# Why can I not get a blog to publish?
-----

 understand that not everyone has ever been exposed to "sophisticated" measures of variability. Thinking back to my education, before college, I only learned about range as a measure of variability. However, I do remember learning about percentile ranks. Once I got to college and learned about standard deviations (SDs) in my first stats class, it made understanding percentile ranks even better. It wasn't until I learned about hypothesis testing that I really learned the importance of SDs. 

I see reports of group comparisons all the time in the media. It can be something as trivial as comparing a player's batting average to the league average, or something influential as a school's average on a test compared to the national or state average. These differences mean absolutlely nothing without knowledge of one and/or two things: 
*the scale of the metric and 
*the variability of the metric. 

This is where SD come into play and why they are so important. It does not matter whether or not you know the scale of the metric, the SD will still give you an idea of how small/large the difference is. Let's build on this in an example of something you may here in the media.

A news station reported that when comparing two local District Schools, District 1 scored 10% higher than District 2. Now let's be more precise and apply this difference to some actual numbers. District 2 had an average score of 20 on TestX and District 1 had an average score of 22 on TestX. This two-point difference may be of little merit and hold no substantive value. However, we need know the SD of TestX to determine the substantive significance of this two point difference. Similarly, say the average score of District 2 was 200 on TestZ, making the average score of District 1 220 on TestZ. A twenty-point difference would appear to have some substantive value, but that may not be the case. This is where discussing the merits of substantive significance become difficult without any knowledge of measures of variability, specifically Standard Deviation.

Measurement properties (variability) and study/sample characteristics (sample size) may eliminate an apparent substantive significance or conversely, indicate an apparent small difference has a lot of substantive value. Variability of a measurement will vary between different tests. For example, TestX may have an average score of 20 and a standard deviation of .5 while TestZ has an average score of 200 with a standard deviation of 80. This means that 98% of scores fall between 19-21 and 40-360 for TestX and TestZ, respectively. 